Exim Documentation
------------------

This directory should contain the following files:

  ChangeLog        most recent log of all changes to Exim
  NewStuff         features that haven't made it to the manual yet,
                   and/or a list of newly-added functionality
  OptionLists.txt  lists of all Exim's options
  README           this document
  README.SIEVE     notes on the Sieve support
  Exim3.upgrade    information about upgrading from release 2.12 to 3.00
  Exim4.upgrade    information about upgrading from release 3.33 to 4.00
  dbm.discuss.txt  discussion of DBM libraries
  filter.txt       specification of filter file contents
  spec.txt         main specification of Exim
  experimental-spec.txt  specification of experimental features


PostScript
----------

The Exim specifications are also available in PostScript. This is not included
in the main distribution because not everyone wants it. Wherever you got this
distribution from should also have carried another file called
exim-postscript-<version>.tar.gz which contains the PostScript documentation.
When de-tarred it creates a directory called exim-postscript-<version> into
which it places the files doc/filter.ps and doc/spec.ps.


HTML
----

A conversion from the original sources into HTML is done to create the online
documentation at http://www.exim.org. This set of files is also available for
installation on other servers. Wherever you got this distribution from should
also have carried another file called exim-html-<version>.tar.gz which contains
the HTML documentation. When de-tarred it creates a directory called
exim-html-<version> into which it places a directory called doc/html containing
the set of HTML files. The kick off point is the traditional index.html.


PDF
---

The Exim specifications are available in Portable Document Format. Wherever you
got this distribution from should also have carried another file called
exim-pdf-<version>.tar.gz which contains the PDF documentation. When de-tarred
it creates a directory called exim-pdf-<version> into which it places the files
doc/filter.pdf and doc/spec.pdf.


TeXinfo
-------

A version of the documentation that has been converted to TeXinfo format is
available in the distribution file exim-texinfo-<version>.gz. When de-tarred it
creates a directory called exim-texinfo-<version> into which it places the
files doc/filter.texinfo and doc/spec.texinfo.

The conversion process is automatic, so the result isn't as nice as
hand-maintained TeXinfo files would be, and some information is lost; for
example, TeXinfo does not support the use of change bars.

-- End --
